# SSEM
Spatial Socio-Econometric Modeling: An Applied Guide to Spatial Data Science, Machine Learning, and Interactive Visualizations with Minimal Code Tools

Spatial socio-econometric modeling (SSEM) is a set of conceptual and statistical and econometric methodological tools for modeling and understanding how attributes that can be located on Earth’s surface (i.e., geo-located or geo-referenced2) may be used to explain their inhabitants’ social and economic outcomes and how these outcomes may likely be part of feedback loops that translate into concentrations of (dis)advantages. For example, living in high income neighborhoods is associated with higher salary and education attainment prospects, whereas the opposite expectations are true for those living in lower income areas.

The geo-located attributes to be used for SSEM are not limited to social constructs (i.e., sociodemographic or socioeconomic indictors), but rather may include physical characteristics of a given area. Note, however, that for convenience and clarity, our examples build from social constructs that have been found to impact social mobility prospects. Accordingly, and having briefly noted that spatial attributes may be of “any” kind, the main tenet of SSEM is that, since concentration of place-based attributes, with either positive or negative connotations, may lead to, or result in, feedback loops that in turn may affect participants’ experiences and outcomes, such geo-contextualized attributes must be included in our statistical models along with our more traditional individual- or unit-level features. From this view, SSEM analyses strive to understand how the constant intermingling of spaces and places (i.e., splaces) may inform the mechanisms behind reproductions of priviledge or even disadvantages. Accordingly, with nuanced understandings that account for individual and geo-contextual attributes, we may gain deeper insights about potential sources of biases resulting from systematic disparities across the neighborhoods or splaces where participants experience life.

Despite the conceptual and analytic benefits associated with accounting for and modeling these place-based attributes, the mainstream use of these methods has been, and continues to be, constrained by computer and statistical programming and coding barriers, for most of these procedures require advanced data handling and manipulation skills. That is, as depicted in subsequent chapters, SSEM analyses require the data access, handling, and manipulation of shapefiles (databases containing points, lines, or polygon geolocated features), matrices (accounting for distances and/or relationships among units), and geolocated databases that may need to be merged with those shapefiles and matrices. The simultaneous handling of these nonstandard data elements, result in cumbersome and long programming and coding procedures that may overwhelm even advanced quantitative researchers.

To remove programming hurdles, with the purpose of democratizing access to spatial data science tools and state of the art, interactive and dynamic spatial data visualizations, this book offers dozens of minimal or low-code tools, which are contained in this repository. Note that the first number represent the chapter where these code Listings appear. For example, the code Listing "Listing_9.6.r" indicates that this is the sixth code Listing in Chapter 9. 
